# March-Madness-Model
A statistical analysis project with the goal of creating a (near) perfect bracket. I'm utilizing my own intuitive knowledge and experience in basketball, xAI Grok 3 beta, Microsoft Excel 365, Python and Power BI. I plan to iterate on a our composite "Grok Score" each year to improve the performance of the predictive model for the NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament. The foundational Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) I'm focusing on to start are; Possession Differential (PD), Effective Field Goal Percentage (EFG%), Strength of Schedule (SOS) and Average Age Weighted by Minutes (AAWM). 

## Possession Differential (PD)
How many more possessions do you get than your opponent on average? Every possession matters in single elimination tournament basketball. Scores on average are lower in this competition format, two teams facing elimination become more risk averse, games are described as "cagey". To get an approximation of the possession battle (fouls & refs constant), we're simply using a team's season average Rebound Differential (RD) and their season average Turnover Differential (TD). RD + TD = PD. 

## Effective Field Goal Percentage (EFG%)
EFG% weights three pointers 50% more, and is a good measure of shooting or scoring efficiency. EFG % = (FGM + 0.5 x 3PM) / FGA. Note: Next year we'll include Free Throws Made (FTM) to get an even more accurate indicator of shooting efficiency. This also would account for points scored off fouls drawn, which is not currently accounted for in this model. For each 1 Possession Differential you give up to your opponent, you'll need to outshoot them by 0.6%. This means for example if you lose the PD by 5, you'll need to outshoot them by about 3% in EFG to tie the game. 

## Strength of Schedule (SOS)
SOS is included in RPI, which is the primary metric for determining Rank. We want our model to be correlated to Rank (RPI), but not perfectly, otherwise we would never predict any upsets. So in this model we'll just focus simply on SOS. For our purposes, SOS = (Opponent's Winning % / # of Games ). We want to use this to be able to discount those teams to some degree that achieve a high rating in PD and EFG%, because of a lack of competition. 

## Average Age Weighted by Minutes (AAWM)
AAWM is a proxy for experience and maturity essentially. The NIL era has ushered in an older generation of college players, which has increased the disparity between ages on the court, in some cases you have 18 year olds playing against 23 or 24 years olds who still have eligibility. This is a crucial factor, especially in terms of motivation (someone playing maybe the last game of their career vs someone just trying not to get hurt before the NBA draft). There is a counter intutive argument however that the older players in NCAA aren't as good, otherwise they would be playing pro already. In any case, we believe it is still a factor, albeit not as significant as PD, EFG or SOS. 

## Data Gathering and Cleaning
We weren't able to find a single source that had all the data were interested in so we utilized Grok 3 beta and Python (PyCharm) in order to scrape basketball stats from various websites in order to aggregate and merge our data into a single table. Our sources were; ncaa.com for EFG%, RD, TD  and basketball.realgm.com for SOS and AAWM. basketball.realgm.com proved difficult to compile the age data, because of the tricky website navigation, and needing to scrape birthdates and minutes played from seperate tables on the same page for all 365 teams.

## Data Merging and Fuzzy Matching. 
There may be no greater fuzzy matching challenge out there than merging NCAA Men's basketball teams stats from various sources. Trying to find the right balance to account for the differencece in terminology; Connecticut vs Uconn for example proved difficult. Another exmaple being that "St." at the beginning of a string means, "Saint", where as "St." at the end of a string means, "State", except for in the case of "Mt. St. Mary's"... We imported packages, 'pandas' and 'fuzzywuzzy' into Pycharm's in order to join on the "Team" column as our Primary Key. There were 9 more teams in the realGM database than in the NCAA website, so that was our target # of teams missing data. In the end we came very close but had to essentially manually match about 20 teams, as there was just no rhyme or reason to the difference between "Texas A&M - CC" and "East Texas A&M". 

